Jupyter for r (#508)
AaltoSciComp/scicomp-docs: triton/apps/jupyter.rst

  # Use envkernel to re-write, loading the R modules.
  envkernel lmod --user --kernel-template=NAME --name=NAME r-irkernel/1.1-python3

Installing a different R version as a kernel

> -------------------------------------------

Reviewer: ```suggestion
--------------------------------------------
```

is to use the existing R installations on Triton.

.. tabs::

  .. tab:: Using a conda environment
     
        You will need to create your own conda environment with all packages that are necessary
        to deploy the environment as a kernel.::

           # Load jupyterhub/live, and miniconda before creating your environment
           module load miniconda

        Create your conda environment, selecting a ``NAME`` for the environment.::

           # his will use the latest R version on conda-forge. If you need a specific version you can specify it
           # as r-essentials=X.X.X, where X.X.X is your required R version number
           mamba create -n NAME -c conda-forge r-essentials r-irkernel 

        The next steps are the same as building a Kernel, except for activating the environment instead of 
        loading the r-irkernel module, since this module depends on the R version.
        the ``displayname`` will be what will be displayed on jupyter ::
        
          # Use Rscript to install jupyter kernel, you need the environment for this.

>           module load jupyterhub/live

Author: It is, IRkernel requires it. Probably to link to jupyter.

          source activate NAME
          Rscript -e "library(IRkernel); IRkernel::installspec(name='NAME', displayname='YOUR R Version')"
          conda deactivate NAME

>           # For R versions before 4, you need to install the kernel. After version 4 IRkernel automatically installs it.

Author: My current assumption:
The 'name' parameter in the `installspec` command refers to the kernel name, while displayname is what jupyter will display. I actually have no idea, what the "name" parameter in envkernel does.

>           # For R versions before 4, you need to install the kernel. After version 4 IRkernel automatically installs it.

Reviewer: In envkernel, `name` is the identefiar name of the kernel (the directory name, like `ir` or `imatlab`)

I guess let's ignore this practical problem and take this, we can improve it later when we know more.

>           envkernel lmod --user --kernel-template=NAME --name=NAME

Author: As the module is needed before, I'll just leave it in there,

    
  .. tab:: Using existing Triton installations of R

       First, you need to load the R version you want to create 
       to deploy the environment as a kernel.::

         module spider r
         module load r/the_version_you_want

       Start R and install the IRkernel package. ::

         # start R
         R
         # In R install the IRkernel package
         install.packages('IRkernel') 
         # exit R again

       Create the installation specs using Rscript and IRKernel. Select a ``NAME`` for the environment specification
       that can be used to install it. The
       Next install the jupyter kernel. Here you need to select the ``NAME`` given before. 
       The NAME is what is will be referred to for installation, while ``DISPLAYNAME`` will be displayed in jupyter::

         # Use Rscript to install jupyter kernel, you need the environment for this.

>          module load jupyterhub/live

Author: see above

        You will need to create your own conda environment with all packages that are necessary
        to deploy the environment as a kernel.::

           # Load and miniconda before creating your environment - this provides mamba that is used to create your environment
           module load miniconda

        Create your conda environment, selecting a ``NAME`` for the environment.::

           # This will use the latest R version on conda-forge. If you need a specific version you can specify it
           # as r-essentials=X.X.X, where X.X.X is your required R version number
           mamba create -n NAME -c conda-forge r-essentials r-irkernel 
           # If Mamba doesn't work you can also replace it with conda, but usually mamba is a lot faster

        The next steps are the same as building a Kernel, except for activating the environment instead of 
        loading the r-irkernel module, since this module depends on the R version.
        the ``displayname`` will be what will be displayed on jupyter ::
        
          # Use Rscript to install jupyter kernel, you need the environment for this.

>           # You need the jupyterhub/live module to point R at the right place for jupyter

Reviewer: ```suggestion
          # You need the Python `jupyter` command so R can know the right place to
          # install the kernel (provided by jupyterhub/live)
```
